CAIRO — Aid trucks drove across Egypt’s Rafah crossing into Gaza for the first time since the start of the war on Saturday, as world leaders and diplomats attempted to build momentum for sustained humanitarian relief during a summit in Cairo.

Are you on Telegram? Subscribe to our channel for the latest updates on Russia’s war in Ukraine.
Volunteers and aid workers applauded and cheered when the first 20 trucks crossed the border. United Nations Secretary General António Guterres welcomed Saturday’s deliveries, but he and others warned the aid was vastly insufficient to meet demand for much-needed relief in Gaza. Before the war, hundreds of trucks with relief supplies crossed into Gaza from various points.

Guterres, who participated in the Cairo summit attended by world leaders and diplomats, called for “immediate, unrestricted and sustained humanitarian aid” for the territory that Israel cut off from food, water and fuel almost two weeks ago. Palestinians in Gaza said Saturday that the besieged coastal enclave is on the verge of collapse.


President of the United Arab Emirates, Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, right, speaks with Italian Prime Minister Giorgia Meloni before the Cairo Summit for Peace on Saturday. (UAE Presidential Court/via REUTERS)
After two weeks of almost no diplomatic progress, the first aid deliveries Saturday — and the release Friday of two American hostages by Hamas — raised hopes that there could be room for humanitarian negotiations. The sense of urgency was compounded by worries that Israel could launch a ground invasion of Gaza.

At the summit convened by Egyptian President Abdel Fatah El-Sisi in Cairo, a range of Arab leaders conveyed a unified message: The attacks on civilians in Gaza must stop and humanitarian aid should be allowed in. Arab leaders urged the Israeli-Palestinian peace process to be rekindled somehow.

In photos: Humanitarian aid arrives in Gaza as Rafah crossing reopens

Sitting directly across from the foreign ministers of France, Germany and other Western nations, Arab leaders leveled bitter accusations over what they described as European and American double standards.

Jordan’s King Abdullah II warned the West it was “dangerous” to overlook the suffering of Palestinian civilians, comparing Western leaders’ strong condemnations of violations in other recent conflicts — an apparent reference to Russia’s strikes on civilians in Ukraine — with what he said was a lack of similar condemnations of Israel’s siege and bombardment of Gaza.

The summit coincided with the two-week mark of the war, touched off by a blitz into Israel by Hamas militants. The conflict has killed more than 1,400 people in Israel and Hamas is believed to hold more than 200 hostages; Palestinian officials say Israeli strikes have killed 4,385 people in Gaza.

President Biden and many European leaders have voiced staunch support for Israel, but they have also repeatedly appealed for humanitarian relief in Gaza and the protection of civilians as the death toll in Gaza mounts. Some critics in the Middle East and elsewhere accuse Western leaders of failing to put enough pressure on Israel to rein in its bombardment of Gaza or lift its siege.

“We must pursue all possible avenues to protect civilians, especially children,” Charles Michel, President of the European Council, said at the Saturday summit, adding that Israel’s defense must be “within the framework of international law.”

The limited breakthrough on Saturday came after President Biden announced earlier this week that he had reached a deal with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to allow aid delivery through Egypt into Gaza, subject to strict conditions. Israel had initially said it would not allow any electricity, water, fuel and other essentials into Gaza until all the hostages seized during Hamas’s attack were released.


The entry of humanitarian aid arrives through the Rafah crossing into the Gaza Strip on Saturday. (Loay Ayyoub for The Washington Post)
Palestinian officials, aid groups, and the U.N. have described the humanitarian conditions in Gaza as increasingly catastrophic, with food in markets and warehouses fast disappearing, and fuel and water running out.

The first convoy on Saturday included “lifesaving supplies” provided by the Egyptian Red Crescent and the United Nations, U.N. Undersecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Martin Griffiths said in a statement. The Hamas-controlled government press center in Gaza said authorities were waiting for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency to distribute the aid.

One of the key obstacles as leaders and diplomats wrangled over the conditions for entry of aid over the past days was the U.S. and Israeli condition that no deliveries reach Hamas. More than 200 trucks with humanitarian deliveries remained stuck on the Egyptian side for days. Most were still waiting to enter the strip on Saturday.

Nebal Farsakh, spokesperson for the Palestinian Red Crescent, said by phone from the West Bank city of Ramallah that she was disappointed that Saturday’s convoy did not provide fuel, which the World Health Organization said was vital to include to run hospital generators, ambulances and desalination plants. Israel’s government remains opposed to fuel deliveries.

“Obviously, this is not enough,” Cindy McCain, the World Food Program’s executive director, said in an interview Saturday. Three trucks’ worth of WFP emergency rations were among the 20 vehicles able to cross on Saturday, she said. But she added: “We need to feed about 800,000 to 1 million people within Gaza. And we can’t do that with 20 trucks.”